<div class="page-break-avoid">

#### 1.1 Introduction to Altmetrics

This project will focus on the field of altmetrics, a relatively new area of study within bibliometrics. As discussed in more depth in section 2.2, bibliometrics is the study of scientific literature itself, analysing it quantitatively to find so-called "impact". Impact is generated when a person gives credit, formally or informally, to others for their work. Some refer to this credit as "reuse", as one can be considered to be reusing the ideas of others in novel work.

</div>

In the past, this credit has been identified solely through a formal citation on a piece of scholarly literature. This method has been used for many years, mostly commonly in the form of the "impact factor", which is calculated by Thomson Reuters' Journal Citation Reports. This factor has been used for many purposes, most commonly to judge the value of a scholar's work.

Researchers have identified several problems with this approach, and this literature is discussed in detail in section 2.2.2. Some of the criticisms levelled at the impact factor include its simplistic "single number" approach and some of the underlying mathematics used in its calculation. Some find that the impact factor is too slow for modern communication methods and other criticise its inappropriate usage as a proxy for assessment outside of journal assessment. Other claim that it is biased towards existing highly respected journals producing a "rich get richer" phenomenon. The impact factor's singular focus on academia has been criticised, with claims that it does not represent real world impact. There are problems with so-called "gaming", where impact is artificially boosted through manipulation of journal publications. This problem arises with Thomson Reuters, who calculate the impact factor, who have been criticised for not publishing the methods by which citations are counted, leading to calls for a more scientific approach. Some point out that traditional scholarly processes are becoming overwhelmed by a growing flood of newly published work. The impact factor has also been found to ignore important areas such as other forms of scholarly output, therefore not providing incentives for good scholarly practice. Also ignored is the effect of an academic network. Finally, the impact factor does not account for retracted papers during its calculation, which has received criticism as unscientific.

Altmetrics has been proposed as an alternative to the impact factor, answering some of the criticism described above. Section 2.3 describes what altmetrics is, and details the individual data sources that make up altmetrics. In general, altmetrics is an attempt to discover scholarly impact from web-based sources. Commonly this involves measuring the number of citations, usually informal, that occur on social networks, such as Twitter and Facebook. Altmetrics is an umbrella term for all of these data sources, which can be combined to perform complex analysis of impact.

Section 2.4 describes the case for altmetrics, discussing the benefits of using such a system. Several studies have found that altmetrics correlate with traditional citation counts, suggesting that they do point to valuable articles. Altmetrics have the ability to discover impact in places previously unmonitored by the impact factor, the "scientific street cred" that occurs in the less formal settings of social networks. Studies have found that altmetrics has a much greater diversity of people, including the general public, than traditional citation count metrics. Altmetrics also allows for a more qualitative perspective on impact through categorisation and through study of network effects, telling the "story" of how impact was generated. Several studies found that altmetrics were able to find useful impact much faster than the impact factor. Altmetrics are also more transparent than traditional metrics, allowing researchers to examine methods of calculation, a more scientific approach. Altmetrics can measure impact from more of an author's work, including data and code. Altmetrics operates a huge scale, allowing researchers to rely more on the "wisdom of the crowds", potentially providing an answer for questions about gaming. Finally, several pieces of literature found that altmetrics can work alongside traditional metrics to provide a multi-dimensional view of impact.

There is, however, criticism of altmetrics in the literature, discussed in detail in section 2.5. Some studies have found that specific data sources were poor indicators of impact. Correlation with citation is disputed, with some researchers finding only weak correlation, although some state that altmetrics may be "orthogonal to citation". In addition, altmetrics coverage is low, with much data found to be sparse. Altmetrics can also be vulnerable to bias, skewing towards a younger, more technical population of authors. It was also suggested that altmetrics is vulnerable to the "rich get richer" phenomenon observed in traditional metrics. Many have accused altmetrics of being open to gaming, claiming that it is too easy to create fake accounts to unfairly skew altmetric data. Another common criticism is that altmetrics relies too heavily on the general public, who cannot be trusted with correctly attributing impact. Some within the altmetrics community have argued against standardisation, stating that it will become "calcified". Finally, there are significant technical hurdles for the altmetrics community to cross before all forms of impact can be correctly identified. For example, it is notoriously difficult to track historical data within Twitter's API.

Section 2.6 draws conclusions from the literature review, finding that altmetrics is a powerful new tool for discovering impact using the web. The section also describes potential future work that can be developed by the altmetrics community. This includes further exploration of categorisation of altmetric data sources, the effects of considering the network on impact and investigating other forms of academic output. However, the area with most exciting potential is the study of how altmetrics changes over time. Many studies have looked at altmetrics within a few hours or days after an article has been published, and further studies have looked at altmetrics aggregated over several years after publication. However, little or no study has been done on how altmetrics changes between these two timescales. This could have very interesting results, as this is an area of the "story" of how impact is generated that has not been looked at in detail.

